---
layout: post
title:  "iSuck@Hiring"
author: sal
categories: [ ]
image: assets/images/12.jpg
featured: true
hidden: true
---

Ring! Ring! Ring! A new day began for Derrick whose alarm not only woke him up but also his Austrialian roommate Daniel whom cannot wait for Derrick to move out. As usual Derrick was running late for work and he rushes out of his townhouse in Sunset Park in the city of Brooklyn, New York. Taking an express train from Brooklyn to Manhattan he always contemplated getting a nice ritzy studio in the financial district of southern Manhattan but he never really cared for long term luxury living, he would instead make terrible irresponsible financial decisions such as renting out overpriced AirBnBs during the weekend and convince himself that he’s being financially responsible. As Derrick arrived at his office building which towered all the others he felt a sense of pride as if his Dad owned the place. That pride was quickly leveled as he arrives at the security desk and realizes he forgot his work badge. Derrick nervously smiles at the security officer and explains his sob story, “Good Morning my brotha, I was rushing out of the house to make it to an early morning meeting and forgot my badge. Can you let me through? I’ll grab a temp badge from the admin on the 12th floor.” The security officer gave him a head nod and let him through knowing that he would tell the same story later in the week. Derrick’s story was true he did have an important meeting that morning. He was scheduled to interview a candidate for a software engineering role and this would be his first time interviewing someone. He did some research on the candidate, browsed the candidates resume, Linkedin, and GitHub profile. Derrick had been in lots of interviews in the past and could write a very long blog post about his experiences. The majority of them were good experiences but for some reason his worst interview experiences stood out in his memory. What made the experiences awful were the intense line of questioning, the lack of transparency to know what topics would be covered, and lack of constructive feedback. Derrick also felt that his personal projects that he built were way more valuable than any questionnaire interviewers would read from. This bias would comeback to haunt him later as he prepared to interview Mark. 

Derrick’s initial impression of Mark based off of his resume was very impressive, young kid from Connecticut fresh out of college who started his studies in computer science but later switched to economics and worked for a boutique financial firm. Derrick was fond of economists and computer scientists so Mark definitely checked off a few key metrics in an ideal candidate. What really impressed Derrick was Mark’s Github page which had a variety of projects that ranged from a web app that calculates the moving average of stock symbols to another app that translates speech to text using IBM’s cloud tools. Shortly after arriving at his desk Derrick zipped off to the conference room where Mark was waiting for him. With a copy of Mark’s resume Derrick enters the elevator to the 14th floor and as he walks through the main entrance he could see Mark sitting through the glass doors of the conference room. Mark, a pale skinny kid with a nervous smile and unsteady hand gets up to shake Derrick’s hand, “Hey there, you must be Derrick”. He responds “Yes I am, glad to meet you Mark” with a calming smile Derrick despite himself being nervous offers Mark a bottle of water to drink. Mark politely declines suspecting the offer was an acknowledgement of his unsteady bodily gestures, thinking the decline would convince Derrick that he is fine. Mark dressed like a recent college graduate who wants the slacks, shoes, and dress shirt he got for his first college career fair to last his whole professional career. Derrick wanted the tenseness in the room to reduce a bit so he started off by asking Mark how his day has been so far. Mark responds with a textbook answer, “All is well can’t complain about this morning’s pleasant weather, really happy about the opportunity to interview with ITsoft.” Derrick nods and starts reviewing Mark’s resume and in the corner of his eye he could see Mark nervously shaking. He asks Mark to talk about his educational background and work experience. He starts off by talking about his college experience and the reasoning behind his switch in majors as well as his first job where he helped a friend's dad manage a growing business. Derrick didn't really find the work he did there relevant to the role he is currently interviewing for so he guides the discussion towards Mark’s GitHub projects. Surprisingly Mark did not elaborate on the details of how he implemented the projects but gave a simple summary of how the apps worked. Derrick suspected he was nervous so he did not dig deeper into his explainations and decided to move on to the technical assessment portion of the interview. Derrick had a prepared algorithm question that he was going to ask Mark but decided he would give him a simpler problem to solve. He asks Mark to write code that formats a string of numbers into a standard US phone number format including any special characters that would make the number readable. Derrick provides Mark with a blank sheet of paper with a pen and dispelled the anxiety of Mark having to get up and write his solution on the white dry erase board behind his chair. Mark struggles to formulate a solution as he exclaims, “I haven’t seen a problem like this before, so I am going to make a lot of assumptions”. Derrick agrees, “I am ok with whichever solution you arrive at as long as you explain your reasoning”. Mark out of frustration scribbles a solution on the paper nervously looking up to his interviewer for signs of approval. It's a painful sympathetic arrangement as Derrick struggles to make Mark feel as comfortable as possible without giving him the obvious solution. Mark faintly utters, “So I have my for loop...umm...the input comes from...umm...I print out this number”. There were moments the deafening silence allowed for the keyboard strokes of ITsoft workers down the hall to be audible. Derrick quickly puts an end to his misery after allowing him to stumble across a solution for almost half an hour. “Good stuff Mark, I see you were on the right track”. Mark uncomfortably accepts the praise and Derrick wanting to switch the subject asks Mark about his stock trading background, “How long have you been into trading?”. Mark confidently responds, “Oh just a few years I’m always trying to learn the latest and greatest strategies, Are you into stock trading?”. Derrick knowing that he just recently learned about the space says, “Yeah I try to read what I can to make sense of it but I would like to learn more over time”. Derrick wraps up the interview and guided Mark to the exit elevator informing him the ITsoft recruiter he was in communication with would reach out to him with updates. Derrick heads back to his desk to gather his thoughts and complete Mark’s feedback form. Derrick knew the technical assessment portion of the interview was a trainwreck and mainly tried to think of every other aspect of the session. Mark trembled throughout most of the interview, his ability to maintain composure was not very high but Derrick empathized and downplayed it to regular interview nervousness that everyone can relate to. Mark’s lack of composure actually impacted every other aspect of the interview and it was hard to separate interview nervousness from cognitive and experience deficiencies. Derrick ultimately decided to make a gut decision that was biased on Mark’s potential based on his side projects which demonstrated Mark’s intent of wanting to continuously improve his skills. Derrick submits the feedback form with a glowing review of Mark and was ready for the young recent graduate to join the ITsoft engineering team. 

It didn't take long for Derrick to realize he made a horrible decision. On Mark’s first day he comes to the office with a withered and wrinkled white t-shirt and khaki slacks that look like he went to bed last night with them on. He runs into Derrick in the break room and sparks a conversation about what is the process of getting a referral bonus for a friend he wants to join the company. Derrick was too tired, exhausted from his morning commute as he recommends that Mark speak to an office admin. Mark continues to ramble, bashing ITsoft’s premiere product stating he was not impressed with the design and implementation. Although Derrick agreed with some of the critique the tone of the criticism was destructive and overly negative. Mark bids farewell and shuffles over to his desk and Derrick exhales and is grateful Mark was not assigned to his team. As the weeks went on Derrick overhears the deterioration of the team across his floor where Mark is a vocal participant who has become very comfortable bashing the product and his team members outwardly. 

Derrick reflects on his poor decision and tries to unravel how he did not see the signs earlier. It was clear that he allowed his emotional sentiments tied to his past challenging interviews to taint his ability to effectively assess a candidate. He overemphasized on making Mark feel comfortable during the interview and was hoping Mark’s technical ability based off of his side projects would overshadow character flaws. The surprising realization was that Mark was mediocre at best when it came to his technical skills which he insecurly tried to hide by criticizing other team members work without providing much of a constructive solution. Derrick later learned that those side projects were not Mark’s original work. He basically forked other programmers projects on GitHub, rebased them, and made a few commits that suggested he was actively working on them. The criminal effort showcases how excellent Mark was at taking shortcuts and was able to fool Derrick. Despite feeling bamboozled Derrick felt as if the main flaw in his assessment of Mark was that he didn't put enough effort in understanding his character. If he developed an interview strategy that could accurately analyze a person’s coachability, ambition, maturity, and composure it would be a perfect framework. Until then Derrick will have to stumble and make more mistakes and meet evolved versions of Mark that will teach him these painful lessons.


```html
<span class="spoiler">My hidden paragraph here.</span>
```
